of the Monarchy to the Persian Conquest, by Leonard William King
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
Title: A History of Babylon, From the Foundation of the Monarchy to the Persian Conquest
       History of Babylonia vol. 2
Author: Leonard William King
Release Date: March 2, 2018 [EBook #56667]
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-8
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF BABYLON, VOL 2 ***
Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature (Images
generously made available by the Internet Archive.)
A HISTORY
OF BABYLONIA
FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE MONARCHY
TO THE PERSIAN CONQUEST
BY
LEONARD W. KING, LITT.D., F.S.A.
Assistant Keeper of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in the British Museum
Professor of Assyrian and Babylonian Archæology in
the University of London
WITH MAP, PLANS, AND ILLUSTRATIONS
LONDON
1915
PREFACE
In the first volume of this work an account was given of the early
races of Babylonia from prehistoric times to the foundation of the
monarchy. It closed at the point when the city of Babylon was about
to secure the permanent leadership under her dynasty of West-Semitic
kings. The present volume describes the fortunes of Babylonia during
the whole of the dynastic period, and it completes the history of
the southern kingdom. Last autumn, in consequence of the war, it
was decided to postpone its publication; but, at the request of the
publishers, I have now finished it and seen it through the press. At
a time when British troops are in occupation of Southern Mesopotamia,
the appearance of a work upon its earlier history may perhaps not be
considered altogether inopportune.
Thanks to recent excavation Babylon has ceased to be an abstraction,
and we are now able to reconstitute the main features of one of the
most famous cities of the ancient world. Unlike Ashur and Nineveh, the
great capitals of Assyria, Babylon survived with but little change
under the Achæmenian kings of Persia, and from the time of Herodotus
onward we possess accounts of her magnificence, which recent research
has in great part substantiated. It is true that we must modify the
description Herodotus has left us of her size, but on all other points
the accuracy of his information is confirmed. The Lion Frieze of the
Citadel and the enamelled beasts of the Ishtar Gate enable us to
understand something of the spell she cast. It is claimed that the
site has been identified of her most famous building, the Hanging
Gardens of the royal palace; and, if that should prove to be the case,
they can hardly be said to have justified their reputation. Far more
impressive is the Tower of Babel with its huge Peribolos, enclosing
what has been aptly described as the Vatican of Babylon.
The majority of the buildings uncovered date from the Neo-Babylonian
period, but they may be regarded as typical of Babylonian civilization
as a whole. For temples were rebuilt again and again on the old lines,
and religious conservatism retained the mud-brick walls and primitive
decoration of earlier periods. Even Nabopolassar's royal palace must
have borne a close resemblance to that of Hammurabi; and the street
network of the city appears to have descended without much change from
the time of the First Dynasty. The system which Hammurabi introduced
into the legislation of his country may perhaps have been reflected in
the earliest attempt at town-planning on a scientific basis. The most
striking fact about Babylon's history is the continuity of her culture
during the whole of the dynastic period. The principal modification
which took place was in the system of land-tenure, the primitive
custom of tribal or collective proprietorship giving place to private
ownership under the policy of purchase and annexation deliberately
pursued by the West-Semitic and Kassite conquerors. A parallel to
the earlier system and its long survival may be seen in the village
communities of India at the present day.
In contrast to that of Assyria, the history of Babylon is more
concerned with the development and spread of a civilization than with
the military achievements of a race. Her greatest period of power was
under her first line of kings; and in after ages her foreign policy was
dictated solely by her commercial needs. The letters from Boghaz Keui,
like those from Tell el-Amarna, suggest that, in keeping her trade
connexions open, she relied upon diplomacy in preference to force.
That she could fight at need is proved by her long struggle with the
northern kingdom, but in the later period her troops were never a match
for the trained legions of Assyria. It is possible that Nabopolassar
and his son owed their empire in great measure to the protecting arm of
Media; and Nebuchadnezzar's success at Carchemish does not prove that
the Babylonian character had suddenly changed. A recently recovered
letter throws light on the unsatisfactory state of at least one section
of the army during Nebuchadnezzar's later years, and incidentally it
suggests that Gobryas, who facilitated the Persian occupation, may be
identified with a Babylonian general of that name. With the fall of
Media, he may perhaps have despaired of any successful opposition on
his country's part.
Babylon's great wealth, due to her soil and semi-tropical climate,
enabled her to survive successive foreign dominations and to impose her
civilization on her conquerors. Her caravans carried that civilization
far afield, and one of the most fascinating problems of her history
is to trace the effect of such intercourse in the literary remains of
other nations. Much recent research has been devoted to this subject,
and the great value of its results has given rise in some quarters to
the view that the religious development of Western Asia, and in a minor
degree of Europe, was dominated by the influence of Babylon. The theory
which underlies such speculation assumes a reading of the country's
history which cannot be ignored. In the concluding chapter an estimate
has been attempted of the extent to which the assumption is in harmony
with historical research.
The delay in the publication of this volume has rendered it possible
to incorporate recent discoveries, some of which have not as yet
appeared in print. Professor A. T. Clay has been fortunate enough
to acquire for the Yale University Collection a complete list of
the early kings of Larsa, in addition to other documents with an
important bearing on the history of Babylon. He is at present preparing
the texts for publication, and has meanwhile very kindly sent me
transcripts of the pertinent material with full permission to make use
of them. The information afforded as to the overlapping of additional
dynasties with the First Dynasty of Babylon has thrown new light on
the circumstances which led to the rise of Babylon to power. But these
and other recent discoveries, in their general effect, do not involve
any drastic changes in the chronological scheme as a whole. They lead
rather to local rearrangements, which to a great extent counterbalance
one another. Under Babylon's later dynasties her history and that of
Assyria are so closely inter-related that it is difficult to isolate
the southern kingdom. An attempt has been made to indicate broadly
the chief phases of the conflict, and the manner in which Babylonian
interests alone were affected. In order to avoid needless repetition, a
fuller treatment of the period is postponed to the third volume of this
work. A combined account will then also be given of the literature and
civilization of both countries.
I take this opportunity of expressing my thanks to Monsieur F.
Thureau-Dangin, Conservateur-adjoint of the Museums of the Louvre, for
allowing me last spring to study unpublished historical material in his
charge. The information he placed at my disposal I found most useful
during subsequent work in the Ottoman Museum at Constantinople shortly
before the war. Reference has already been made to my indebtedness
to Professor Clay, who has furnished me from time to time with other
unpublished material, for which detailed acknowledgment is made in the
course of this work. With Professor C. F. Burney I have discussed many
of the problems connected with the influence of Babylon upon Hebrew
literature; and I am indebted to Professor A. C. Headlam for permission
to reprint portions of an article on that subject, which I contributed
in 1912 to the _Church Quarterly Review._
To Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge my thanks are due, as he suggested that I
should write these histories, and he has given me the benefit of his
advice. To him, as to Sir Frederic Kenyon and Mr. D. G. Hogarth, I
am indebted for permission to make use of illustrations, which have
appeared in official publications of the British Museum. My thanks
are also due to Monsieur Ernest Leroux of Paris for allowing me to
reproduce some of the plates from the "Mémoires de la Délégation en
Perse," published by him under the editorship of Monsieur J. de Morgan;
and to the Council and Secretary of the Society of Biblical Archæology
for the loan of a block employed to illustrate a paper I contributed to
their Proceedings. The greater number of the plates illustrating the
excavations are from photographs taken on the spot; and the plans and
drawings figured in the text are the work of Mr. E. J. Lambert and Mr.
C. O. Waterhouse, who have spared no pains to ensure their accuracy.
The designs upon the cover of this volume represent the two most
prominent figures in Babylonian tradition. In the panel on the face of
the cover the national hero Gilgamesh is portrayed, whose epic reflects
the Babylonian heroic ideal. The panel on the back of the binding
contains a figure of Marduk, the city-god of Babylon, grasping in his
right hand the flaming sword with which he severed the dragon of chaos.
L. W. KING.
CONTENTS
    CHAPTER I
    INTRODUCTORY: BABYLON'S PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY
    Babylon as a centre of civilization--Illustrations
    of foreign influence--Babylon's share in the origin
    of the culture she distributed--Causes which led to
    her rise as capital--Advantages of her geographical
    position--Transcontinental lines of traffic--The Euphrates
    route, the Royal Road, and the Gates of Zagros--Her
    supremacy based on the strategic and commercial qualities
    of her site--The political centre of gravity in Babylonia
    illustrated by the later capitals, Seleucia, Ctesiphon,
    and Baghdad--The Persian Gulf as barrier, and as channel
    of international commerce--Navigation on the Euphrates and
    the Tigris--Causes of Babylon's deposition--Her treatment
    by Cyrus, Alexander, and Seleucus--The Arab conquest of
    Mesopotamia instructive for comparison with the era of
    early city-states--Effect of slackening of international
    communications--Effect of restoration of commercial
    intercourse with the West--Three main periods of Babylon's
    foreign influence--Extent to which she moulded the cultural
    development of other races-Traces of contact in Hebrew
    religion and in Greek mythology--Recent speculation on the
    subject to be tested by the study of history
    CHAPTER II
    THE CITY OF BABYLON AND ITS REMAINS: A DISCUSSION OF THE
    RECENT EXCAVATIONS
    The site of Babylon in popular tradition--Observations of
    Benjamin of Tudela and John Eldred--Exaggerations of early
    travellers--The description of Herodotus--Modern survey and
    excavation--Characteristics of Babylonian architecture--The
    architect's ideal--Comparison of Babylonian and Assyrian
    architectural design--Difficulties of Babylonian
    excavation--The extent of Babylon and the classical
    tradition--Remains of the ancient city--The Walls of
    Babylon--The Outer City-wall--The Mound Bâbil--The Ḳaṣr--The
    Inner City-wall--Imgur-Bêl and Nimitti-Bêl--Quay-walls and
    fortifications--Nebuchadnezzar's river-fortification--Change
    in the course of the Euphrates--Palaces of Nabopolassar
    and Nebuchadnezzar--The official courts of the
    palace--Al-Bît-shar-Bâbili--The Throne-Room and its
    enamelled façade--The private palace and the women's
    apartments--The Hanging Gardens of Babylon--The Ishtar Gate
    and its Bulls and Dragons--Later defences of the Southern
    Citadel--The Lion Frieze--The Procession Street--Temples
    of Babylon--E-makh, the temple of Ninmakh--Altars in the
    Babylonian and Hebrew cults--The unidentified temple--The
    temple of Ishtar of Akkad--Religious mural decoration--The
    temple of Ninib--E-sagila and the Tower of Babylon--The
    Peribolos or Sacred Precincts--E-zida and the Temple-tower
    of Borsippa--The Euphrates bridge--Merkes and the street
    net-work of Babylon--Strata of different periods--Early
    Babylonian town-planning--Material influence of the
    West-Semitic Dynasty--Continuity of Babylonian culture
    CHAPTER III
    THE DYNASTIES OF BABYLON: THE CHRONOLOGICAL SCHEME IN THE
    LIGHT OF RECENT DISCOVERIES
    Chronology the skeleton of history--Principal defect
    in the Babylonian scheme--The Dynasties of Nîsin,
    Larsa and Babylon--Discovery of a List of the kings of
    Larsa--Introduction of fresh uncertainty--Relationship
    of the kings of Babylon and Nîsin--Absence of
    synchronisms--Evidence of date-formula?.--A fresh and
    sounder line of research--Double-dates supply the missing
    link for the chronology--The Nîsin era--Explanation of the
    double-dates--The problem of Rîm-Sin--Method of reconciling
    data--Another line of evidence--Archæological research and
    the Second Dynasty of the Kings' List--Date-formulæ of
    Hammurabi, Samsu-iluna and Iluma-ilum--Methods of fixing
    period of First Dynasty--Ammi-zaduga's omens from the planet
    Venus--Combinations of Venus, sun, and moon--Possibility of
    fixing period of observations--Alternative dates in their
    relation to historical results--The time of harvest in
    farming-out contracts of the period--Probable date for the
    First Dynasty--Re-examination of chronological notices in
    later texts--The Dynasties of Berossus and the beginning of
    his historical period--Effect of recent discoveries on the
    chronological scheme as a whole--Our new picture of the rise
    of Babylon
    CHAPTER IV
    THE WESTERN SEMITES AND THE FIRST DYNASTY OF BABYLON
    Original home of the Amurru, or Western Semites--Arabia
    one of the main breeding-grounds of the human race--The
    great Semitic migrations and their cause--Evidence
    of diminution of rainfall in Arabia--The life of the
    pastoral nomad conditioned by the desert--The change
    from pastoral to agricultural life--Successive stages of
    Canaanite civilization--The neolithic inhabitants and
    the Amorite migration--Canaanites of history and their
    culture--Eastern Syria and the middle Euphrates--Recent
    excavations at Carchemish and its neighbourhood--Early
    Babylonian cylinder-seals on the Sajûr--Trade of Carchemish
    with Northern Babylonia--West Semitic settlements on
    the Khâbûr--The kingdom of Khana--The Amorite invasion
    of Babylonia--The Dynasties of Nîsin and Larsa--Recent
    discoveries at Ashur--Proto-Mitannians--The Western
    Semites in Babylon and their conflict with Assyria--Early
    struggles and methods of expansion--The Elamite conquest
    of Larsa--The three-cornered contest of Nîsin, Elam and
    Babylon--The fall of Nîsin and the duel between Babylon and
    Elam--Hammurabi's defeat of Rîm-Sin and the annexation of
    Sumer by Babylon--Extent of Hammurabi's empire--Hammurabi
    the founder of Babylon's greatness--His work as law-giver
    and administrator
    CHAPTER V
    THE AGE OF HAMMURABI AND ITS INFLUENCE ON LATER PERIODS
    The energy of the Western Semite and his perpetuation of a
    dying culture--His age one of transition--Contemporaneous
    evidence on social and political conditions--The three
    grades in the social scale of Babylon--The nobles a
    racial aristocracy--Origin and rights of the middle
    class--Condition of slaves--Pastoral and agricultural
    life in early Babylonia--Regulations sanction
    long-established custom--The _corvée_ for public
    works--Canals and fishing-rights--Methods of irrigation
    and their modern equivalents--Survival of the Babylonian
    plough and grain-drill--Importance of the date-palm
    and encouragement of plantations--Methods of transport
    by water--The commercial activities of Babylon and the
    larger cities--Partnerships for foreign trade--Life in the
    towns--Family life in early Babylonia--The position of
    women--Privileges enjoyed by votaries--The administration
    of justice--Relation of the crown and the priestly
    hierarchy under the Western Semites--The royal regulation
    of the calendar and the naming of the year--System of
    administration--Changes in the religious sphere and
    revision of the pantheon--Literary activity--The complete
    semitization of the country unaccompanied by any break in
    culture--Babylon's later civilization moulded by Hammurabi's
    age
    CHAPTER VI
    THE CLOSE OF THE FIRST DYNASTY OF BABYLON AND THE KINGS FROM
    THE COUNTRY OF THE SEA
    Condition of the empire on Samsu-iluna's accession--Early
    Kassite raid the signal for revolt, assisted by Elamite
    invasion--Resources of Babylon strained in suppressing
    the rebellion--Rise of an independent kingdom in the
    Sea-Country on the littoral of the Persian Gulf--Capacity
    of the Sea-Country for defence and as a base for offensive
    operations--Sumerian elements in its population--Babylon's
    loss of territory and her struggle with the Sea-Country
    kings--Symptoms of decadence under the later West-Semitic
    kings of Babylon--The deification of royalty and increased
    luxury of ritual--Evidence of Babylon's growing wealth
    and artistic progress under foreign influence--Temporary
    restoration of Babylon's power under Ammi-ditana--Renewed
    activity of the Sea-Country followed by gradual decline of
    Babylon--The close of the West-Semitic dynasty brought about
    or hastened by Hittite invasion--Period of local dynasties
    following the fall of Babylon--Continued succession of the
    Sea-Country kings
    CHAPTER VII
    THE KASSITE DYNASTY AND ITS RELATIONS WITH EGYPT AND THE
    HITTITE EMPIRE
    The Kassite conquest of Babylonia--The Kassites
    probably Aryans by race and akin to the later rulers
    of Mitanni--Character of their rule in Babylon--Their
    introduction of the horse into Western Asia--The
    Kassite conquest of the Sea-Country and its annexation
    to Babylon--Gap in our knowledge of the Kassite
    succession--The letters from Tell el-Amarna and
    Boghaz-Keui--Egypt and Western Asia at the close of
    the fifteenth century--Diplomacy and the balance of
    power--Dynastic marriages and international intercourse of
    the period--Amen-hetep III. and Kadashman-Enlil--Akhenaten
    and his policy of doles--Babylon's caravans in Syria--The
    correspondence of Burna-Buriash and Akhenaten--Egypt's
    loss of her Asiatic provinces--Rise of the Hittite
    Empire--The Hittites and their civilization--Their capital
    of Khatti--Their annexation of Mitanni and the Egyptian
    war--The relations of Khattusil with Kadashman-turgu
    and Kadashman-Enlil II.--Character of the Hittite
    correspondence--The growth of Assyria and her relations
    with Babylon--First phase in the long struggle of the two
    kingdoms--The later members of the Kassite Dynasty--Its
    fall to be traced to Elamite invasion--Economic conditions
    in Babylonia under the Kassites--Kudurru-inscriptions or
    boundary-stones--Their evidence on the Babylonian system of
    land-tenure--Gradual disappearance of tribal proprietorship
    as a result of West-Semitic and Kassite policy--Transition
    from collective to private ownership
    CHAPTER VIII
    THE LATER DYNASTIES AND THE ASSYRIAN DOMINATION
    Spoils at Susa from the Elamite invasion--Recovery
    of her territory by Babylon under Nebuchadnezzar
    I.--Renewal of conflicts and treaties with Assyria--The
    devastation of Babylonia by the Sutû--Ephemeral
    Babylonian dynasties--The state of Sippar typical
    of the condition of the country--Renaissance of
    Assyria--The conquests of Ashur-uasir-pal and Babylon's
    abortive opposition--Babylonian art in the ninth
    century--Intervention of Shalmaneser III. in Babylonian
    politics--His campaign in Chaldea--The kingdom of Urartu
    and its effect on Assyrian expansion--Independence
    of provincial governments during a relaxation of
    central control--Temporary recovery of Babylon under
    Nabonassar--Gradual tightening of Assyria's grasp
    upon the southern kingdom--Character of her later
    empire--Tiglath-pileser IV.'s policy of deportation and its
    inherent weakness--The disappearance of Erartu as a buffer
    state--Sargon and Merodach-baladan--Sennacherib's attempt
    to destroy Babylon--Esarhaddon's reversal of his father's
    policy--The Assyrian conquest of Egypt--Ashur-bani-pal and
    the revolt of Shamash-shum-ukîn--The sack of Susa--Babylon
    under the Sargonids--The policies of encouragement and
    coercion--Effect of their alternation
    CHAPTER IX
    THE NEO-BABYLONIAN EMPIRE AND THE PERSIAN CONQUEST
    Nabopolassar and his nascent kingdom--The Scythian invasion
    and its effects--The sons of Ashur-bani-pal--Nabopolassar
    and the Medes--The fall of Nineveh--Division of Assyrian
    territory--Babylon's conflict with Egypt--Nebuchadnezzar
    II. and the Battle of Carchemish--Capture of Jerusalem
    and deportation of the Jews--Occupation of Phoenicia
    and siege of Tyre--Nebuchadnezzar's later campaign
    in Egypt--Babylon and the Median suzerainty--Lydia
    under the successors of Ardys--Conflict of Cyaxares
    and Alyattes on the Halys and the intervention of
    Babylon--Nebuchadnezzar as builder--Condition of the
    Babylonian army in Nebuchadnezzar's closing years and under
    his successors--Gubaru, the general, and the governor of
    Gutium--Death of Neriglissar--Character of Nabonidus--The
    decaying empire under Median protection--The rise of
    Cyrus--His ease in possessing himself of Media, and the
    probable cause--His defeat and capture of Croesus and
    the fall of Lydia--His advance on Babylon--Possibility
    that Gobryas was a native Babylonian--His motive in
    facilitating the Persian occupation--Defeat and death of
    Belshazzar--Popularity of Cyrus in Babylon--Tranquillity
    of the country under Persian rule--Babylon's last bids for
    independence--Her later history--Survival of Babylonian
    cults into the Christian era
    CHAPTER X
    GREECE, PALESTINE, AND BABYLON: AN ESTIMATE OF CULTURAL
    INFLUENCE
    Influence of Babylon still apparent in the modern world--The
    mother of astronomy, and the survival of her ancient system
    of time-division--The political and religious history of
    the Hebrews in the light of Babylonian research--Echoes
    from Babylonian legends in Greek mythology--The Babylonian
    conception of the universe--The astral theory and its
    comprehensive assumptions--Was Babylonian religion
    essentially a star-worship?--Application of historical
    test--Evolution of the Babylonian god--Origin of divine
    emblems and animal symbolism--World Ages and the astral
    theory--Late evidence and the earlier historical
    periods--The astral ages of the Twins, the Bull and the
    Ram--Suggested influence of each age upon the historical
    literature of antiquity--The Old Testament and the Odyssey
    under astral interpretation--Astronomical defects of the
    astral theory--The age of Babylonian astronomy--Hipparchus
    of Nicæa and the precession of the equinoxes--Hebrews
    and Babylonian astrology--Contrast of the Babylonian and
    Hellenic temperaments--Mesopotamia and the coast-lands of
    Asia Minor--Tales that are told
    APPENDICES
    I. A COMPARATIVE LIST OF THE DYNASTIES OF NISIX, LAKSA, AND
    BABYLON
    II. A DYNASTIC LIST OF THE KINGS OF BABYLON
    INDEX
    LIST OF PLATES
    I. Merodach-baladan II., King of Babylon, making a grant of
    land to Bêl-akhê-erba, governor of Babylon _Frontispiece_
    II. (i) The temple-tower of E-zida at Borsippa. (ii) The
    Lion of Babylon on the Ḳaṣr Mound
    III. The Throne Room in Nebuchadnezzar's palace at Babylon,
    showing the recess in the back wall where the throne once
    stood
    IV. Eastern Towers of the Ishtar Gate, the portions
    preserved having formed the foundation of the final gateway
    V. Trench showing a portion of the Sacred Way of Babylon, to
    the east of the Peribolos
    VI. Two views of the Temple of Ninib in course of excavation
    VII. Brick of Sin-idinnam, King of Larsa, recording the
    cutting of a canal and the restoration of the Temple of the
    Moon-god in the city of Ur
    VIII. Hammurabi, King of Babylon, from a relief in the
    British Museum, dedicated on his behalf to the West Semitic
    goddess [Ash]ratum by Itur-ashdum, a provincial governor
    IX. Brick of Warad-Sin, King of Larsa, recording building
    operations in the city of Ur
    X. The Citadel Mound of Carchemish from the north-west
    XI. Upper portion of the Code of Hammurabi, engraved with
    a scene representing the king receiving his laws from the
    Sun-god
    XII.(i) Bronze cone and votive figure, (ii) Stone cylinder
    with a votive inscription of Warad-Sin, King of Larsa
    XIII. Portion of the text of Hammurabi's Code, Columns 6-8
    XIV. A modern gufa, a form of coracle described by Herodotus
    and represented on the monuments
    XV. (i) A small kelek on the Tigris at Baghdad, (ii)
    Ferry-boats on the Euphrates at Birejik
    XVI. Impressions of Babylonian cylinder-seals, engraved with
    mythological subjects
    XVII. Impressions of Kassite cylinder-seals 198
    XVIII. Brick of Sin-gashid, King of Erech, recording the
    building of his palace in that city 210
    XIX. Head of a colossal statue of Amen-hetep III
    XX. Hittite hieroglyphic inscription at Carchemish
    XXI. Kassite kudurrus, or boundary-stones, set up in the
    reigns of Meli-Shipak II. and Nazi-maruttash
    XXII. Divine emblems on the upper part of akudurru, or
    boundary-stone, engraved with a charter of privileges
    granted by Nebuchadnezzar I
    XXIII. Memorial-tablet of Nabû-aplu-iddina, King of Babylon,
    recording his restoration of the Sun-temple at Sippar
    XXIV. Shalmaneser III. receiving the submission of the
    Chaldeans, from the bronze sheathing of his Gates in the
    British Museum
    XXV. Ashur-bani-pal, represented carrying a builder's
    basket, as the restorer of E-sagila, the temple of Marduk at
    Babylon
    XXVI. Bronze door-step from E-zida, the temple of Nabû
    at Borsippa, inscribed with the name and titles of
    Nebuchadnezzar II.
    XXVII. (i) Baked clay foundation-cylinder of Nabonidus,
    referring to the defeat of Astyages by Cyrus, (ii) Baked
    clay foundation-cylinder of Cyrus, recording his entry into
    Babylon "without battle and without fighting"
    XXVIII. Impressions of Neo-Babylonian and Persian
    cylinder-seals
    XXIX. Limestone statue of the god Nabû at Nimrûd
    XXX. Divine emblems sculptured on the lower portion of the
    boundary-stone engraved with a charter of Nebuchadnezzar
    I.(cp. Plate XXII.)
    XXXI. Two views of a clay model of a sheep's liver with the
    surface divided up and labelled for purposes of divination
    XXXII. A Neo-Babylonian treatise on astronomy, inscribed
    with classified lists of the principal stars and
    constellations, heliacal risings and settings, culminations
    in the south, etc.
    ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT
    1. Diagram to illustrate the political centre of gravity in
    Babylonia
    2. Map of the neighbourhood of Babylon and Birs-Nimrûd;
    after the India Office Map
    3. Plan of the ruins of Babylon; after Koldewey and Andrae
    4. Ground-plan of part of the outer city-wall; after
    Koldewey and Andrae
    5. Conjectural restoration of the Southern Citadel; after
    Andrae
    6. Plan of the Southern Citadel; after Koldewey, Reuther,
    and Wetzel
    7. Ground-plan of quay-walls and fortification-walls in the
    north-west corner of the Southern Citadel; after Koldewey
    8. Section of the quay-walls and fortification-walls along
    the north front of the Southern Citadel; after Andrae
    9. Plan of the Throne Room of Nebuchadnezzar II. and part of
    the private palace; after Koldewey
    10. Design in enamelled brick from the façade of the Throne
    Room
    11. Plan of the north-east corner of the palace with the
    Vaulted Building; after Koldewey
    12. Bull in enamelled brick from the Ishtar Gate
    13. Dragon in enamelled brick from the Ishtar Gate
    14. Ground-plan of the Ishtar Gate; after Koldewey
    15. Section of the Ishtar Gate; after Andrae
    16. Diagram to show the arrangement of the beasts of the
    Ishtar Gate; after Koldewey
    17. Enamelled fragment of the Ishtar Gate still in position
    18. Plan of the later defences of the Citadel upon the
    north, showing the walls with the Lion Frieze and the Ishtar
    Gate
    19. Lion from the frieze of the Sacred Way to the north of
    the Ishtar Gate
    20. Ground-plan of E-makh, the temple of the goddess
    Ninmakh; after Andrae
    21. Conjectural restoration of E-makh; after Andrae
    22. Gold plaque, with architectural design, from a
    Neo-Babylonian burial; enlargement after photo, by Koldewey
    23. Ground-plan of the unidentified temple known as "Z";
    after Andrae
    24. Conjectural restoration of the unidentified temple known
    as "Z"; after Andrae and Koldewey
    25. Ground-plan of the temple of Ishtar of Akkad; after
    Reuther
    20. Ground-plan of the temple of Ninib; after Andrae
    27. Ground-plan of E-temen-anki and E-sagila; after Wetzel
    28. Conjectural reconstruction of E-temen-anki and E-sagila;
    after Andrae
    29. Ground-plan of E-zida and the temple-tower of Nabû at
    Borsippa; after Koldewey
    30. Rough engraving of a temple-tower upon a boundary-stone
    31. Plan of the Merkes Mound, showing part of the street
    network of Babylon; after Koldewey
    32-33. Arabs of the seventh century B.C., from a sculpture
    in the Nineveh Gallery of the British Museum
    34. Head of an archaic limestone figure from Ashur
    35-30. Heads of archaic figures from Ashur and Tello
    37-39. Examples of archaic sculpture from Ashur and Tello,
    exhibiting the same convention in the treatment of woollen
    garments
    40. The Old Babylonian form of plough in use; after Clay
    41. Assyrian kelek on the Tigris; after La yard
    42. The Assyrian prototype of the gufa; from a bas-relief in
    the British Museum
    43. Assyrian raft of logs on the Tigris; from a bas-relief
    in the British Museum
    44. Swamp in Southern Babylonia, or the Sea-Country; after a
    bas-relief at Nineveh
    45. The zebu or humped oxen of the Sea-Country; after a
    bas-relief from Nineveh in the British Museum
    40. Akhenaten, with his queen and infant daughters, on the
    balcony of their palace; after N. de G. Davies
    47-48. Representations of Hittites in Egyptian sculpture;
    after Meyer
    49. Hittite foot-soldiers at the Battle of Kadesh; after
    Meyer
    50. Hittite chieftain, a captive of Rameses III.; after Meyer
    51. Figure, probably of a Hittite king, from the Royal Gate
    at Khatti; after a photo, by Puchstein
    52. The Royal Gate of Khatti, the capital of the Hittites,
    viewed from the outside; after Puchstein
    53. Conjectural restoration of a Hittite gateway viewed from
    outside; after Puchstein
    54. Longitudinal section of the Lower Western Gateway at
    Khatti; after Puchstein
    55. Transverse section of the Lower Western Gateway at
    Khatti; after Puchstein
    56. One of the two sacred boats of Khonsu, the Egyptian
    Moongod, who journeyed into Cappadocia to cast out a devil
    from a Hittite princess; after Rosellini
    57. Rameses II. offering incense to one of the boats of
    Khonsu before he started on his journey; after Rosellini
    58. Scene representing Nabû-mukîn-apli sanctioning a
    transfer of landed property
    59. Marduk and his dragon from a votive offering of
    Marduk-zakir-shum; after Weissbach
    60. The Assyrian army in Chaldea, 851 B.C.; from the Gates
    of Shalmaneser in the British Museum
    61. A Chaldean town of the ninth century B.C.; from the
    Gates of Shalmaneser
    62-63. The tribute of the Chaldeans; from the Gates of
    Shalmaneser
    64. Bas-relief of Shamash-rêsh-usur, governor of the lands
    of Sukhi and Mari; after a photo, by Weissbach
    65. The god Adad from a votive offering dedicated in
    E-sagila by Esarhaddon; after Weissbach
    66-68. The weather-god and two goddesses from an Assyrian
    bas-relief; after Layard
    69. Figure of deity in portable shrine; after Layard
    70. Sumerian harp, with the sound-case surmounted by the
    figure of a bull
    71. The guardian lions of the Eastern Gate of Heaven, from
    the impression of a cylinder-seal in the Louvre; after Heuzey
    72. Winged monster on enamelled frieze at Persepolis; after
    Dieulafoy
    MAPS AND PLANS
    I. Diagram to illustrate the political centre of gravity in
    Babylonia (Fig. 1)
    II. Map of the neighbourhood of Babylon and Birs-Nimrûd
    (Fig. 2)
    III. Plan of the ruins of Babylon (Fig. 3)
    IV. Ground-plan of part of the outer city-wall (Fig. 4)
    V. Plan of the Southern Citadel (Fig. 6)
    VI. Ground-plan of quay-walls and fortification-walls in the
    N.W. corner of the S. Citadel (Fig. 7)
    VII. Plan of the Throne Room of Nebuchadnezzar and part of
    the private palace (Fig. 9)
    VIII. Plan of the N.E. corner of the palace with the Vaulted
    Building (Fig. 11)
    IX. Ground-plan of the Ishtar Gate (Fig. 14)
    X. Plan of the later defences of the Citadel upon the N.,
    showing the walls with the Lion Frieze and the Ishtar Gate
    (Fig. 18)
    XI. Ground-plan of E-makh, the temple of the goddess Ninmakh
    (Fig. 20)
    XII. Ground-plan of the unidentified temple known as "Z"
    (Fig. 23)
    XIII. Ground-plan of the temple of Ishtar of Akkad (Fig. 25)
    XIV. Ground-plan of the temple of Ninib (Fig. 20)
    XV. Ground-plan of E-temen-anki and E-sagila (Fig. 27)
    XVI. Ground-plan of E-zida and the temple-tower of Nabii at
    Borsippa (Fig. 29)
    XVII. Plan of the Merkes Mound, showing part of the street
    network of Babylon (Fig. 31)
    XVIII. Map of Babylonia, Assyria and Mesopotamia. Inset: Map
    of Western Asia
A HISTORY OF BABYLON
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY: BABYLON'S PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY
The name of Babylon suggests one of the great centres from which
civilization radiated to other peoples of the ancient world. And it
is true that from the second millennium onwards we have evidence of
the gradual spread of Babylonian culture throughout the greater part
of Western Asia. Before the close of the fifteenth century, to cite a
single example of such influence, we find that Babylonian had become
the language of Eastern diplomacy. It is not surprising perhaps that
the Egyptian king should have adopted the Babylonian tongue and method
of writing for his correspondence with rulers of Babylon itself or
of Assyria. But it is remarkable that he should employ this foreign
script and language for sending orders to the governors of his Syrian
and Palestinian dependencies, and that such Canaanite officials
should use the same medium for the reports they despatched to their
Egyptian master. In the same period we find the Aryan rulers of
Mitanni, in Northern Mesopotamia, writing in cuneiform the language of
their adopted country. A few decades later the Hittites of Anatolia,
discarding their old and clumsy system of hieroglyphs except for
monumental purposes, borrow the same character for their own speech,
while their treaties with Egypt are drawn up in Babylonian. In the
ninth century the powerful race of the Urartians, settled in the
mountains of Armenia around the shores of Lake Van, adopt as their
national script the writing of Assyria, which in turn had been derived
from Babylon. Elam, Babylon's nearest foreign neighbour, at a very
early period had, like the Hittites of a later age, substituted for
their rude hieroglyphs the language and older characters of Babylon,
and later on they evolved from the same writing a character of their
own. Finally, coming down to the sixth century, we find the Achæmenian
kings inventing a cuneiform sign-list to express the Old Persian
language, in order that their own speech might be represented in royal
proclamations and memorials beside those of their subject provinces of
Babylon and Susiania.
These illustrations of Babylonian influence on foreign races are
confined to one department of culture only, the language and the system
of writing. But they have a very much wider implication. For when
a foreign language is used and written, a certain knowledge of its
literature must be presupposed. And since all early literatures were
largely religious in character, the study of the language carries with
it some acquaintance with the legends, mythology and religious beliefs
of the race from whom it was borrowed. Thus, even if we leave out of
account the obvious effects of commercial intercourse, the single group
of examples quoted necessarily implies a strong cultural influence on
contemporary races.
It may thus appear a paradox to assert that the civilization, with
which the name of Babylon is associated, was not Babylonian. But it is
a fact that for more than a thousand years before the appearance of
that city as a great centre of culture, the civilization it handed on
to others had acquired in all essentials its later type. In artistic
excellence, indeed, a standard had been already reached, which, so far
from being surpassed, was never afterwards attained in Mesopotamia.
And although the Babylonian may justly be credited with greater system
in his legislation, with an extended literature, and perhaps also with
an increased luxury of ritual, his efforts were entirely controlled
by earlier models. If we except the spheres of poetry and ethics, the
Semite in Babylon, as elsewhere, proved himself a clever adapter,
not a creator. He was the prophet of Sumerian culture and merely
perpetuated the achievements of the race whom he displaced politically
and absorbed. It is therefore the more remarkable that his particular
city should have seen but little of the process by which that culture
had been gradually evolved. During those eventful centuries Babylon had
been but little more than a provincial town. Yet it was reserved for
this obscure and unimportant city to absorb within herself the results
of that long process, and to appear to later ages as the original
source of the culture she enjoyed. Before tracing her political
fortunes in detail it will be well to consider briefly the causes which
contributed to her retention of the place she so suddenly secured for
herself.
The fact that under her West-Semitic kings Babylon should have taken
rank as the capital city does not in itself account for her permanent
enjoyment of that position. The earlier history of the lands of
Sumer and Akkad abounds with similar examples of the sudden rise of
cities, followed, after an interval of power, by their equally sudden
relapse into comparative obscurity. The political centre of gravity
was continually shifting from one town to another, and the problem we
have to solve is why, having come to rest in Babylon, it should have
remained there. To the Western Semites themselves, after a political
existence of three centuries, it must have seemed that their city was
about to share the fate of her numerous predecessors. When the Hittite
raiders captured and sacked Babylon and carried off her patron deities,
events must have appeared to be taking their normal course. After the
country, with her abounding fertility, had been given time to recover
from her temporary depression, she might have been expected to emerge
once more, according to precedent, under the aegis of some other
city. Yet it was within the ancient walls of Babylon that the Kassite
conquerors established their headquarters; and it was to Babylon, long
rebuilt and once more powerful, that the Pharaohs of the eighteenth
Dynasty and the Hittite kings of Cappadocia addressed their diplomatic
correspondence. During Assyria's long struggle with the southern
kingdom Babylon was always the protagonist, and no raid by Aramean or
Chaldean tribes ever succeeded in ousting her from that position. At
the height of Assyrian power she continued to be the chief check upon
that empire's expansion, and the vacillating policy of the Sargonids
in their treatment of the city sufficiently testifies to the dominant
_rôle_ she continued to play in politics. And when Nineveh had fallen,
it was Babylon that took her place in a great part of Western Asia.
This continued pre-eminence of a single city is in striking contrast
to the ephemeral authority of earlier capitals, and it can only be
explained by some radical change in the general conditions of the
country. One fact stands out clearly: Babylon's geographical position
must have endowed her during this period with a strategical and
commercial importance which enabled her to survive the rudest shocks
to her material prosperity. A glance at the map will show that the
city lay in the north of Babylonia, just below the confluence of the
two great rivers in their lower course. Built originally on the left
bank of the Euphrates, she was protected by its stream from any sudden
incursion of the desert tribes. At the same time she was in immediate
contact with the broad expanse of alluvial plain to the south-east,
intersected by its network of canals.
But the real strength of her position lay in her near neighbourhood
to the transcontinental routes of traffic. When approaching Baghdad
from the north the Mesopotamian plain contracts to a width of some
thirty-five miles, and, although it has already begun to expand again
in the latitude of Babylon, that city was well within touch of both
rivers. She consequently lay at the meeting-point of two great avenues
of commerce. The Euphrates route linked Babylonia with Northern Syria
and the Mediterranean, and was her natural line of contact with Egypt;
it also connected her with Cappadocia, by way of the Cilician Gates
through the Taurus, along the track of the later Royal Road.[1] Farther
north the trunk-route through Anatolia from the west, reinforced by
tributary routes from the Black Sea, turns at Sivas on the Upper Halys,
and after crossing the Euphrates in the mountains, first strikes the
Tigris at Diarbekr; then leaving that river for the easier plain, it
rejoins the stream in the neighbourhood of Nineveh and so advances
southward to Susa or to Babylon. A third great route that Babylon
controlled was that to the east through the Gates of Zagros, the
easiest point of penetration to the Iranian plateau and the natural
outlet of commerce from Northern Elam.[2] Babylon thus lay across the
stream of the nations' traffic, and in the direct path of any invader
advancing upon the southern plains.
That she owed her importance to her strategic position, and not to any
particular virtue on the part of her inhabitants, will be apparent from
the later history of the country. It has indeed been pointed out that
the geographical conditions render necessary the existence of a great
urban centre near the confluence of the Mesopotamian rivers.[3] And
this fact is amply attested by the relative positions of the capital
cities, which succeeded one another in that region after the supremacy
had passed from Babylon. Seleucia, Ctesiphon and Baghdad are all
clustered in the narrow neck of the Mesopotamian plain, and for only
one short period, when normal conditions were suspended, has the centre
of government been transferred to any southern city.[4] The sole change
has consisted in the permanent selection of the Tigris for the site of
each new capital, with a decided tendency to remove it to the left or
eastern bank.[5] That the Euphrates should have given place in this way
to her sister river was natural enough in view of the latter's deeper
channel and better water way, which gained in significance as soon as
the possibility of maritime communication was contemplated.
Throughout the whole period of Babylon's supremacy the Persian Gulf,
so far from being a channel of international commerce, was as great
a barrier as any mountain range. Doubtless a certain amount of local
coasting traffic was always carried on, and the heavy blocks of diorite
which were brought to Babylonia from Magan by the early Akkadian king
Narâm-Sin, and at a rather later period by Gudea of Lagash,[6] must
have been transported by water rather than over land. Tradition, too,
ascribed the conquest of the island of Dilmun, the modern Bahrein,
to Sargon of Akkad; but that marked the extreme limit of Babylonian
penetration southwards, and the conquest must have been little more
than a temporary occupation following a series of raids down the
Arabian coast. The fact that two thousand years later Sargon of
Assyria, when recording his receipt of tribute from Upêri of Dilmun,
should have been so far out in his estimate of its distance from the
Babylonian coast-line,[7] is an indication of the continued disuse of
the waters of the gulf as a means of communication. On this supposition
we may readily understand the difficulties encountered by Sennacherib
when transporting his army across the head of the gulf against certain
coast-towns of Elam, and the necessity, to which he was put, of
building special ships for the purpose.
There is evidence that in the Neo-Babylonian period the possibilities
of transport by way of the gulf had already begun to attract attention,
and Nebuchadnezzar II. is said to have attempted to build harbours
in the swamp at the mouths of the delta.[8] But his object must have
been confined to encouraging coastal trade, for the sea-route between
the Persian Gulf and India was certainly not in use before the fifth
century, and in all probability was inaugurated by Alexander. According
to Herodotus[9] it had been opened by Darius after the return of the
Greek Scylax of Caryanda from his journey to India, undertaken as one
of the surveying expeditions on the basis of which Darius founded
the assessment of his new satrapies. But, although there is no need
to doubt the historical character of that voyage, there is little
to suggest that Scylax coasted round, or even entered, the Persian
Gulf.[10] Moreover, it is clear that, while Babylon's international
trade received a great impetus under the efficient organization of
the Persian Empire, it was the overland routes which benefited. The
outcrops of rock, or cataracts, which blocked the Tigris for vessels
of deeper draft, were not removed until Alexander levelled them; and
the problem of Babylon's sea-traffic, to which he devoted the closing
months of his life, was undoubtedly one of the factors which, having
now come into prominence for the first time, influenced Seleucus in
selecting a site on the Tigris for his new capital.[11]
But that was not the only cause of Babylon's deposition. For after
her capture by Cyrus, new forces came into play which favoured a
transference of the capital eastward. During the earlier periods of her
history Babylon's chief rival and most persistent enemy had lain upon
her eastern frontier. To the early Sumerian rulers of city-states Elam
had been "the mountain that strikes terror,"[12] and during subsequent
periods the cities of Sumer and Akkad could never be sure of immunity
from invasion in that quarter. We shall see that in Elam the Western
Semites of Babylon found the chief obstacle to the southward extension
of their authority, and that in later periods any symptom of internal
weakness or dissension was the signal for renewed attack. It is true
that the Assyrian danger drew these ancient foes together for a time,
but even the sack of Susa by Ashur-bani-pal did not put an end to their
commercial rivalry.
During all this period there was small temptation to transfer the
capital to any point within easier striking distance of so powerful a
neighbour; and with the principal passes for eastward traffic under
foreign control, it was natural that the Euphrates route to Northern
Mesopotamia and the Mediterranean coast should continue to be the
chief outlet for Babylonian commerce. But on the incorporation of the
country within the Persian empire all danger of interference with her
eastern trade was removed; and it is a testimony to the part Babylon
had already played in history that she continued to be the capital
city of Asia for more than two centuries. Cyrus, like Alexander,
entered the city as a conqueror, but each was welcomed by the people
and their priests as the restorer of ancient rights and privileges.
Policy would thus have been against any attempt to introduce radical
innovations. The prestige the city enjoyed and the grandeur of its
temples and palaces doubtless also weighed with the Achæmenian kings in
their choice of Babylon for their official residence, except during the
summer months. Then they withdrew to the cooler climate of Persepolis
or Ecbatana, and during the early spring, too, they might transfer the
court to Susa; but they continued to recognize Babylon as their true
capital. In fact, the city only lost its importance when the centre of
government was removed to Seleucia in its own immediate neighbourhood.
Then, at first possibly under compulsion, and afterwards of their own
freewill, the commercial classes followed their rulers to the west bank
of the Tigris; and Babylon suffered in proportion. In the swift rise of
Seleucia in response to official orders, we may see clear proof that
the older city's influence had been founded upon natural conditions,
which were shared in an equal, and now in even a greater degree, by the
site of the new capital.
[Illustration: FIG. 1.
DIAGRAM TO ILLUSTRATE THE POLITICAL CENTRE OF GRAVITY IN BABYLONIA.
The circle marks the limits within which the capital shifted from the
period of the First Dynasty onwards. It was only under the abnormal
conditions produced by the Moslem conquest that Kûfa and Basra became
for five generations the twin capitals of 'Irâk; this interval presents
a parallel to the earlier period before the rise of Babylon.]
The secret of Babylon's greatness is further illustrated by still
later events in the valley of the Euphrates and the Tigris. The rise
of Ctesiphon on the left bank of the river was a further result of
the eastward trend of commerce. But it lay immediately opposite
Seleucia, and marked no fresh shifting of the centre of gravity. Of
little importance under the Seleucid rulers, it became the chief city
of the Arsacidæ, and, after the Parthian Empire had been conquered by
Ardashir I., it continued to be the principal city of the province and
became the winter residence of the Sassanian kings. When in 636 A.D.
the Moslem invaders defeated the Persians near the ruins of Babylon
and in the following year captured Ctesiphon, they found that city
and Seleucia to which they gave the joint name of Al-Madâin, or "the
cities," still retaining the importance their site had acquired in the
third century B.C. Then follows a period of a hundred and twenty-five
years which is peculiarly instructive for comparison with the earlier
epochs of Babylonian history.
The last of the great Semitic migrations from Arabia had resulted
in the conquests of Islam, when, after the death of Mohammed, the
Arab armies poured into Western Asia in their efforts to convert the
world to their faith. The course of the movement, and its effect upon
established civilizations which were overthrown, may be traced in the
full light of history; and we find in the valley of the Tigris and
Euphrates a resultant economic condition which forms a close parallel
to that of the age before the rise of Babylon. The military occupation
of Mesopotamia by the Arabs closed for a time the great avenues of
transcontinental commerce; and, as a result, the political control of
the country ceased to be exercised from the capital of the Sassanian
kings and was distributed over more than one area. New towns sprang
into being around the permanent camps of the Arab armies. Following on
the conquest of Mesopotamia, the city of Basra was built on the Shatt
el-'Arab in the extreme south of the country, while in the same year,
638 A.D., Kûfa was founded more to the north-west on the desert side of
the Euphrates. A third great town, Wâsit, was added sixty-five years
later, and this arose in the centre of the country on both banks of
the Tigris, whose waters were then passing along the present bed of
the Shatt el-Hai. It is true that Madâin retained a measure of local
importance, but during the Omayyad Caliphate Kûfa and Basra were the
twin capitals of 'Irâk.[13]
Thus the slackening of international connections led at once to a
distribution of authority between a north and a south Babylonian
site. It is true that both capitals were under the same political
control, but from the economic standpoint we are forcibly reminded of
the era of city-states in Sumer and Akkad. Then, too, there was no
external factor to retain the centre of gravity in the north; and
Erech more than once secured the hegemony, while the most stable of
the shifting dynasties was the latest of the southern city of Ur. The
rise of Babylon as the sole and permanent capital of Sumer and Akkad
may be traced, as we shall note, to increased relations with Northern
Syria, which followed the establishment of her dynasty of West-Semitic
kings.[14] And again we may see history repeating herself, when Moslem
authority is removed to Baghdad at the close of the first phase in
the Arab occupation of Mesopotamia. For on the fall of the Omayyad
dynasty and the transference of the Abbasid capital from Damascus to
the east, commercial intercourse with Syria and the west was restored
to its old footing. Basra and Kûfa at once failed to respond to the
changed conditions, and a new administrative centre was required. It
is significant that Baghdad should have been built a few miles above
Ctesiphon, within the small circle of the older capitals;[15] and
that, with the exception of a single short period,[16] she should have
remained the capital city of 'Irâk. Thus the history of Mesopotamia
under the Caliphate is instructive for the study of the closely
parallel conditions which enabled Babylon at a far earlier period to
secure the hegemony in Babylonia and afterwards to retain it.
From this brief survey of events it will have been noted that Babylon's
supremacy falls in the middle period of her country's history, during
which she distributed a civilization in the origin of which she played
no part. When she passed, the culture she had handed on passed with
her, though on Mesopotamian soil its decay was gradual. But she had
already delivered her message, and it has left its mark on the remains
of other races of antiquity which have come down to us. We shall see
that it was in three main periods that her influence made itself felt
in any marked degree beyond the limits of the home-land. The earliest
of these periods of external contact was that of her First Dynasty of
West-Semitic rulers, though the most striking evidence of its effect is
only forthcoming after some centuries had passed. In the second period
the process was indirect, her culture being carried north and west
by the expansion of Assyria. The last of the three epochs coincides
with the rule of the Neo-Babylonian kings, when, thanks to her natural
resources, the country not only regained her independence, but for a
short time established an empire which far eclipsed her earlier effort.
And in spite of her speedy return, under Persian rule, to the position
of a subject province, her foreign influence may be regarded as
operative, it is true in diminishing intensity, well into the Hellenic
period.
The concluding chapter will deal in some detail with certain
features of Babylonian civilization, and with the extent to which
it may have moulded the cultural development of other races. In
the latter connexion a series of claims has been put forward which
cannot be ignored in any treatment of the nation's history. Some of
the most interesting contributions that have recently been made to
Assyriologieal study undoubtedly concern the influence of ideas, which
earlier research had already shown to be of Babylonian origin. Within
recent years a school has arisen in Germany which emphasizes the part
played by Babylon in the religious development of Western Asia, and,
in a minor degree, of Europe. The evidence on which reliance has been
placed to prove the spread of Babylonian thought throughout the ancient
world has been furnished mainly by Israel and Greece; and it is claimed
that many features both in Hebrew religion and in Greek mythology can
only be rightly studied in the light thrown upon them by Babylonian
parallels from which they were ultimately derived. It will therefore
be necessary to examine briefly the theory which underlies most recent
speculation on this subject, and to ascertain, if possible, how far it
may be relied on to furnish results of permanent value.
But it will be obvious that, if the theory is to be accepted in whole
or in part, it must be shown to rest upon a firm historical basis, and
that any inquiry into its credibility should be more fitly postponed
until the history of the nation itself has been passed in review. After
the evidence of actual contact with other races has been established
in detail, it will be possible to form a more confident judgment
upon questions which depend for their solution solely on a balancing
of probabilities. The estimate of Babylon's foreign influence has
therefore been postponed to the closing chapter of the volume. But
before considering the historical sequence of her dynasties, and the
periods to which they may be assigned, it will be well to inquire what
recent excavation has to tell us of the actual remains of the city
which became the permanent capital of Babylonia.
[Footnote 1: Cf. Hogarth, "The Nearer East," pp. 212 ff., and Ramsay,
"The Historical Geography of Asia Minor," pp. 27 ff. Herodotus (V,
52-54) describes the "Royal Road" of the Persian period as passing
from Ephesus by the Cilician Gates to Susa, and it obtained its name
from the fact that all government business of the Persian Court passed
along it; the distances, given by Herodotus in parasangs and stages,
may well be derived from some official Persian document (cf. How and
Wells, "Commentary on Herodotus," II, p. 21). But it followed the track
of a still earlier Royal Road, by which Khatti, the capital of the old
Hittite Empire, maintained its communications westward and with the
Euphrates valley.]
[Footnote 2: At the present day this forms the great trunk-road across
the highlands of Persia, by way of Kirmanshah; and, since the Moslem
conquest, it has been the chief overland route from the farther East
for all those making the pilgrimage to Mecca.]
[Footnote 3: Cf. Hogarth, _op. cit.,_ p. 200 f.]
[Footnote 4: See below, pp. 9 ff.]
[Footnote 5: It is not improbable that the transference from one bank
to the other was dictated by the relations of the ruling empire with
Persia and the West.]
[Footnote 6: See "Sumer and Akkad," p. 242.]
[Footnote 7: Cf. Delitzsch, "Paradies," pp. 178 ff., and Meyer,
"Geschichte des Altertums," 1., ii.; p. 473.]
[Footnote 8: See below, Chap. IX., p. 280.]
[Footnote 9: IV., 44.]
[Footnote 10: Cp. Myres, "Geographical Journal," Mil. 1896, p. 623, and
How and Wells, "Commentary on Herodotus," Vol. I., p. 320.]
[Footnote 11: See Bevan, "House of Seleucus," I., pp. 242 ff., 253.]
[Footnote 12: Cf. "Sum. and Akk.," p. 149.]
[Footnote 13: As such the two cities were known as 'Al-'Irâkân, or
Al-'Irâkayn, meaning "the two capitals of 'Irâk"; cf. G. Le Strange.
"The Lands of the Eastern Caliphate," p. 25.]
[Footnote 14: See further, Chap IV. The fact that from time to time
other cities of Akkad had secured the leadership, suggests that the
forces which eventually placed Babylon at the head of the country were
already beginning to be felt. They were doubtless checked in no small
degree by the absence of an internal administration of any lasting
stability during the acute racial conflict which characterized the
period.]
[Footnote 15: The city was founded by the second Abbasid Caliph in 762
A.D.]
[Footnote 16: For a period of fifty-six years (336-392 A.D.) the
Caliphate was removed to Sâmarrâ. The circumstances which led to the
transference may be traced directly to the civil war which broke out on
the death of Harûn-ar-Rashîd; cf. Le Strange, _op. cit.,_ p. 32.]
CHAPTER II
THE CITY OF BABYLON AND ITS REMAINS: A DISCUSSION OF THE RECENT
EXCAVATIONS
The actual site of Babylon was never lost in popular tradition. In
spite of the total disappearance of the city, which followed its
gradual decay under Seleucid and Parthian rule, its ancient fame
sufficed to keep it in continual remembrance. The old Semitic name
Bâb-ilî, "the Gate of the Gods," lingered on about the site, and under
the form Babil is still the local designation for the most northerly of
the city-mounds. Tradition, too, never ceased to connect the exposed
brickwork of Nebuchadnezzar's main citadel and palace with his name.
Ḳaṣr, the Arab name for the chief palace-mound and citadel of Babylon,
means "palace" or "castle," and when in the twelfth century Benjamin
of Tudela visited Baghdad, the Jews of that city told him that in
the neighbouring ruins, near Hilla, the traveller might still behold
Nebuchadnezzar's palace beside the fiery furnace into which Hananiah,
Mishael and Azariah had been thrown. It does not seem that this
adventurous rabbi actually visited the site,[1] though it is unlikely
that he was deterred by fear of the serpents and scorpions with which,
his informants said, the ruins were infested.
In the sixteenth century an English merchant traveller, John Eldred,
made three voyages to "New Babylon," as he calls Baghdad, journeying
from Aleppo down the Euphrates. On the last occasion, after describing
his landing at Faluja, and how he secured a hundred asses for lack
of camels to carry his goods to Baghdad, he tells us that "in this
place which we crossed over stood the olde mightie citie of Babylon,
many olde ruines whereof are easilie to be scene by daylight, which
I, John Eldred, have often behelde at my goode leisure having made
three voyages between the New Citie of Babylon and Aleppo over this
desert."[2] But it would seem probable from his further description
that "the olde tower of Babell," which he visited "sundry times," was
really the ruin of 'Akarkûf, which he would have passed on his way to
Baghdad. Benjamin of Tudela, on the other hand, had taken Birs-Nimrûd
for the Tower of Babel,[3] and had noted how the ruins of the streets
of Babylon still extend for thirty miles. In fact, it was natural that
several of the early travellers should have regarded the whole complex
of ruins, which they saw still standing along their road to Baghdad,
as parts of the ancient city; and it is not surprising that some of
the earlier excavators should have fallen under a similar illusion so
far as the area between Bâbil and El-Birs is concerned.[4] The famous
description of Herodotus, and the accounts other classical writers
have left us of the city's size, tended to foster this conviction;
and, although the centre of Babylon was identified correctly enough,
the size of the city's area was greatly exaggerated. Babylon had cast
her spell upon mankind, and it has taken sixteen years of patient and
continuous excavation to undermine that stubborn belief. But in the
process of shrinkage, and as accurate knowledge has gradually given
place to conjecture, the old spell has reappeared unchanged. It may be
worth while to examine in some detail the results of recent work upon
the site, and note to what extent the city's remains have thrown light
upon its history while leaving some problems still unsolved.
[Illustration: FIG. 2.
MAP OF THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF BABYLON AND BIRS-NIMRÛD.
A: The mound Bâbil. B: The mound Ḳaṣr. C: The mound 'Amrân-ibn-'Ali. D:
The mound Merkes. E: Inner City-wall of Babylon. F: Outer City-wall of
Babylon. G: Ruins of western walls. H: Temple-tower of E-zida. K: Ruins
of E-zida. L: Marsh. M: Hindîya Canal.
(After the India Office Map.)]
In view of the revolution in our knowledge of Babylonian topography,
which has been one of the most striking results of recent work, no
practical purpose would be served by tracing out the earlier but very
partial examinations of the site which were undertaken successively
by Rich in 1811,[5] by Layard in 1850,[6] by Oppert as the head of
a French expedition in the years 1852-54,[7] and by Hormuzd Rassam,
between 1878 and 1889, when he was employed on excavations for the
British Museum.[8] During the last of these periods the British Museum
obtained a valuable series of tablets from Babylon, some of the texts
proving of great literary and scientific interest. In 1887, and again
after a lapse of ten years, Dr. Robert Koldewey visited the site of
Babylon and picked up fragments of enamelled bricks on the east side
of the Ḳaṣr. On the latter occasion he sent some of them to Berlin,
and Dr. Richard Schöne, at that time Director of the Royal Museums,
recognized their artistic and archæological interest. Thus it was with
the hope of making speedy and startling discoveries that the German
Oriental Society began work upon the site at the end of March in the
year 1899; and it is the more to the credit of the excavators that
they have not allowed any difficulties or disappointments to curtail
and bring to a premature close the steady progress of their research.
The extent of ground covered by the remains of the ancient city, and
the great accumulation of _débris_ over some of the principal buildings
rendered the work more arduous than was anticipated, and consequently
the publication of results has been delayed. It is true that, from the
very beginning of operations, the expert has been kept informed of
the general progress of the digging by means of letters and reports
distributed to its subscribers every few months by the society.[9] But
it was only in 1911, after twelve years of uninterrupted digging, that
the first instalment was issued of the scientific publication. This was
confined to the temples of the city, and for the first time placed the
study of Babylonian religious architecture upon a scientific basis.[10]
In the following year Dr. Koldewey, the director of the excavations,
supplemented his first volume with a second, in which, under pressure
from the society, he forestalled to some extent the future issues of
the detailed account by summarizing the results obtained to date upon
all sections of the site.[11] It has thus been rendered possible to
form a connected idea of the remains of the ancient city, so far as
they have been recovered.
In their work at Babylon the excavators have, of course, employed
modern methods, which differ considerably from those of the age when
Layard and Botta brought the winged bulls of Assyria to the British
Museum and to the Louvre. The extraordinary success which attended
those earlier excavators has, indeed, never been surpassed. But it
is now realized that only by minuteness of search and by careful
classification of strata can the remains of the past be made to
reveal in full their secrets. The fine museum specimen retains its
importance; but it gains immensely in significance when it ceases to be
an isolated product and takes its place in a detailed history of its
period.
[Illustration: (i) The temple-tower of E-zida at Borsippa. (ii) The
Lion of Babylon on the Ḳaṣr Mound]
In order to grasp the character of the new evidence, and the methods
by which it has been obtained at Babylon, it is advisable to bear in
mind some of the general characteristics of Babylonian architecture
and the manner in which the art of building was influenced by the
natural conditions of the country. One important point to realize is
that the builders of all periods were on the defensive, and not solely
against human foes, for in that aspect they resembled other builders
of antiquity. The foe they most dreaded was Hood. Security against
flood conditioned the architect's ideal: he aimed solely at height
and mass. When a king built a palace for himself or a temple for his
god, he did not consciously aim at making it graceful or beautiful.
What he always boasts of having done is that he has made it "like a
mountain." He delighted to raise the level of his artificial mound or
building-platform, and the modern excavator owes much to this continual
filling in of the remains of earlier structures. The material at his
disposal was also not without its influence in the production of
buildings "like mountains," designed to escape the floods of the plain.
The alluvial origin of the Babylonian soil deprived the inhabitants
of an important factor in the development of the builder's art:
it produced for them no stone. But it supplied a very effective
building-material in its place, a strongly adhesive clay. Throughout
their whole history the Babylonian architects built in crude and in
kiln-burnt brick. In the Neo-Babylonian period we find them making
interesting technical experiments in this material, here a first
attempt to roof in a wide area with vaulting, elsewhere counteracting
the effects of settlement by a sort of expansion-joint. We shall see,
too, that it was in this same medium that they attained to real beauty
of design.
Brick continued to be the main building-material in Assyria too, for
that country derived its culture from the lower Euphrates valley.[12]
But in the north soft limestone quarries were accessible. So in
Assyria they lined their mud-brick walls with slabs of limestone,
carved in low relief and brightly coloured; and they set up huge stone
colossi to flank their palace entrances. This use of stone, both as a
wall-lining and in wall-foundations, constitutes the main difference
between Babylonian and Assyrian architectural design. Incidentally
it explains how the earlier excavators were so much more successful
in Assyria than in Babylonia; for in both countries they drove their
tunnels and trenches into most of the larger mounds. They could tunnel
with perfect certainty when they had these stone linings of the
walls to guide them. But to follow out the ground-plan of a building
constructed only of unburnt brick, with mud or clay for mortar,
necessitates a slower and more systematic process of examination.
For unburnt brick becomes welded into a solid mass, scarcely to be
distinguished from the surrounding soil, and the lines of a building in
this material can only be recovered by complete excavation.
An idea of the labour this sometimes entails may be gained from the
work which preceded the identification of E-sagila, the great temple
of Marduk, the city-god of Babylon. The temple lies at a depth of
no less than twenty-one metres below the upper level of the hill of
_débris_; and portions of two of its massive mud-brick walls, together
with the neighbouring pavements, were uncovered by bodily removing the
great depth of soil truck by truck. But here even German patience and
thoroughness have been beaten, and tunnelling was eventually adopted
to establish the outer limits of the ground-plan, much of the interior
of which still remains unexplored.[13]
The Babylon which has now been partially cleared, though in its
central portion it reaches back to the First Dynasty and to the
period of Hammurabi, is mainly that of the Neo-Babylonian empire,
when Nebuchadnezzar II., and Nabonidus, the last native Babylonian
king, raised their capital to a condition of magnificence it had not
known before. This city survived, with but little change, during the
domination of the Achæmenian kings of Persia, and from the time of
Herodotus onward Babylon was made famous throughout the ancient world.
At that time Ashur and Nineveh, the great capitals of Assyria, had
ceased to exist; but Babylon was still in her glory, and descriptions
of the city have come down to us in the works of classical writers.
To fit this literary tradition to the actual remains of the city has
furnished a number of fascinating problems. How, for example, are we
to explain the puzzling discrepancy between the present position of
the outer walls and the enormous estimate of the city's area given by
Herodotus, or even that of Ctesias? For Herodotus himself appears to
have visited Babylon; and Ctesias was the physician of Artaxerxes II.
Mnemon, who has left a memorial of his presence in a marble building on
the Ḳaṣr.
Herodotus reckons that the walls of Babylon extended for four hundred
and eighty stades, the area they enclosed forming an exact square,
a hundred and twenty stades in length each way.[14] In other words,
he would have us picture a city more than fifty-three miles in
circumference. The estimate of Ctesias is not so large, his side
of sixty-five stades giving a circumference of rather over forty
miles.[15] Such figures, it has been suggested, are not in themselves
impossible, Koldewey, for example, comparing the Great Wall of China
which extends for more than fifteen hundred miles, and is thus about
twenty-nine times as long as Herodotus's estimate for the wall of
Babylon.[16] But the latter was not simply a frontier-fortification.
It was the enclosing wall of a city, and a more apposite comparison is
that of the walls of Nanking, the largest city-site in China, and the
work of an empire even greater than Babylon.[17] The latter measure
less than twenty-four miles in circuit, and the comparison does not
encourage an acceptance of Herodotus's figures on grounds of general
probability. It is true that Oppert accepted them, but he only found
this possible by stretching his plan of the city to include the whole
area from Babil to Birs-Nimrûd,[18] and by seeing traces of the city
and its walls in every sort of intervening mound of whatever period.
As a matter of fact part of the great wall, which surrounded the city
from the Neo-Babylonian period onward, has survived to the present
day, and may still be recognized in a low ridge of earth, or series
of consecutive mounds,[19] which cross the plain for a considerable
distance to the south-east of Babil. The traveller from Baghdad, after
crossing the present Nîl Canal by a bridge,[20] passes through a gap in
the north-eastern wall before he sees on his right the isolated mound
of Bâbil with the extensive complex of the Ḳaṣr and its neighbour, Tell
'Amrân-ibn-'Ali, stretching away in front and to his left.[21] The
whole length of the city-wall, along the north-east side, may still be
traced by the position of these low earthen mounds, and they prove that
the city on this side measured not quite two and three-quarter miles
in extent. The eastern angle of the wall is also preserved, and the
south-east wall may be followed for another mile and a quarter as it
doubles back towards the Euphrates. These two walls, together with the
Euphrates, enclose the only portion of the ancient city on which ruins
of any importance still exist. But, according to Herodotus and other
writers, the city was enclosed by two similar walls upon the western
bank, in which case the site it occupied must have formed a rough
quadrangle, divided diagonally by the river. No certain trace has yet
been recovered of the western walls,[22] and all remains of buildings
seem to have disappeared completely on that side of the river. But for
the moment it may be assumed that the city did occupy approximately an
equal amount of space upon the western bank; and, even so, its complete
circuit would not have extended for more than about eleven miles, a
figure very far short of any of those given by Herodotus, Ctesias and
other writers.
[Illustration: FIG. 3.
PLAN OF THE RUINS OF BABYLON.
A: The mound Babil. B: Outer City-wall. C: Inner City-wall. D: The
Ḳaṣr mound. E: The mound 'Amrân-ibn-'Ali. F: E-makh, temple of the
goddess Ninmakh. G: Temple of Ishtar of Akkad. H: E-tomen-anki, the
Tower of Babylon. I: Ancient bed of the Euphrates. J: The mound Merkes.
K: E-sagila, the temple of Marduk. L: The mound Ishin-aswad. M:
Unidentified temple known as "_Z._" N: E-patutila, the temple of Ninib.
P: Greek theatre. Q: Sakhn, the small plain covering the precincts of
the Tower of Babylon. R: The mound Homera. S: Nîl Canal. T: Bridge over
Nîl Canal. U: Former bed of Nîl Canal. V: Old Canal. W: Euphrates. X:
Track from Baghdad to Hilla. Z: Mounds covering the ruins of walls. I:
Village of Anana. 2: Village of Kweiresh. 3: Village of Jumjumma. 4:
Village of Sinjar.
(After Koldewey and Andrae.)]
Dr. Koldewey suggests that, as the estimate of Ctesias approximates to
four times the correct measurement, we may suspect that he mistook the
figure which applies to the whole circumference for the measure of one
side only of the square. But even if we accept that solution, it leaves
the still larger figure of Herodotus unexplained. It is preferable
to regard all such estimates of size, not as based on accurate
measurements, but merely as representing an impression of grandeur
produced on the mind of their recorder, whether by a visit to the city
itself, or by reports of its magnificence at second-hand.
The excavators have not as yet devoted much attention to the city-wall,
and, until more extensive digging has been carried out, it will not be
possible to form a very detailed idea of the system of fortification.
But enough has already been done to prove that the outer wall was a
very massive structure, and consisted of two separate walls with the
intermediate space filled in with rubble. The outer wall, or face,
which bore the brunt of any attack and rose high above the moat
encircling the city, was of burnt brick set in bitumen. It measured
more than seven metres in thickness, and below ground-level was further
protected from the waters of the moat by an additional wall, more
than three metres in thickness, and, like it, constructed of burnt
brick with bitumen as mortar. Behind the outer wall, at a distance
of some twelve metres from it, was a second wall of nearly the same
thickness. This faced inward towards the city, and so was constructed
of crude or unburnt brick, as it would not be liable to direct assault
by a besieger; and the mortar employed was clay.[23] The crude-brick
wall cannot be dated accurately, but it is certainly older than the
reign of Nebuchadnezzar, and in his father's time it probably formed
the outer city's sole protection.[24] The burnt-brick wall and the
moat-lining in front of it date, in their present form, from the age of
Nebuchadnezzar, for they are built of his square bricks, impressed with
his usual stamp, which are so common over the whole site of Babylon.
[Illustration: FIG. 4.
GROUND-PLAN OF PART OF THE OUTER CITY-WALL.
A: Outer moat-lining of burnt-brick. B: Moat. C: Inner moat-lining of
burnt-brick. D: Outer wall of burnt-brick. E: Rubble-filling. F: Inner
wall of crude brick, with towers built at intervals across it. The
figures on the plan give measurements in metres.
(After Koldewey and Andrae.)]
At intervals along the crude-brick wall were towers projecting slightly
beyond each face.[25] Only the bases of the towers have been preserved,
so that any restoration of their upper structure must rest on pure
conjecture. But, as rubble still fills the space between the two
walls of burnt and unburnt brick, it may be presumed that the filling
was continued up to the crown of the outer wall. It is possible that
the inner wall of crude brick was raised to a greater height and
formed a curtain between each pair of towers. But even so, the clear
space in front, consisting of the rubble filling and the burnt-brick
wall, formed a broad roadway nearly twenty metres in breadth, which
extended right round the city along the top of the wall. On this
point the excavations have fully substantiated the account given by
Herodotus, who states that "on the top, along the edges of the wall,
they constructed buildings of a single chamber facing one another,
leaving between them room for a four-horse chariot to turn."[26] Even
if smaller towers were built upon the outer edge, there would have been
fully enough space to drive a team of four horses abreast along the
wall, and in the intervals between the towers two such chariots might
easily have passed each other. It has been acutely noted that this
design of the wall was not only of protection by reason of its size,
but was also of great strategic value; for it enabled the defence to
move its forces with great speed from one point to another, wherever
the attack at the moment might be pressed.[27]
In fact it is only in the matter of size and extent that the
description given by Herodotus of the walls of Babylon is to be
discounted; and those are just the sort of details that an ancient
traveller would accept without question from his local guide. His total
number for the city-gates is also no doubt excessive,[28] but his
description of the wall itself as built of burnt-brick tallies exactly
with the construction of its outer face, which would have been the only
portion visible to any one passing outside the city. Moreover, in one
portion of the wall, as reconstructed by Nebuchadnezzar, its inner as
well as its outer half appears to have been formed of burnt-brick. This
is the small rectangular extension, which Nebuchadnezzar threw out to
protect his later citadel now covered by the mound known as Babil.[29]
The mound of Babil represents Nebuchadnezzar's latest addition to the
city's system of fortification, and its construction in advance of
the old line of the outer walls was dictated by the desire, of which
we find increasing evidence throughout his reign, to strengthen the
capital against attack from the north. The mound has not yet been
systematically excavated, but enough has been done to prove that, like
the great citadel upon the Ḳaṣr, it protected a royal palace consisting
of a large number of chambers and galleries grouped around open courts.
From this fact it is clear that a Babylonian citadel was not simply a
fortress to be used by the garrison for the defence of the city as a
