of the Monarchy to the Persian Conquest, by Leonard William King
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
Title: A History of Babylon, From the Foundation of the Monarchy to the Persian Conquest
       History of Babylonia vol. 2
Author: Leonard William King
Release Date: March 2, 2018 [EBook #56667]
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-8
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF BABYLON, VOL 2 ***
Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature (Images
generously made available by the Internet Archive.)
A HISTORY
OF BABYLONIA
FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE MONARCHY
TO THE PERSIAN CONQUEST
BY
LEONARD W. KING, LITT.D., F.S.A.
Assistant Keeper of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities in the British Museum
Professor of Assyrian and Babylonian Archæology in
the University of London
WITH MAP, PLANS, AND ILLUSTRATIONS
LONDON
1915
PREFACE
In the first volume of this work an account was given of the early
races of Babylonia from prehistoric times to the foundation of the
monarchy. It closed at the point when the city of Babylon was about
to secure the permanent leadership under her dynasty of West-Semitic
kings. The present volume describes the fortunes of Babylonia during
the whole of the dynastic period, and it completes the history of
the southern kingdom. Last autumn, in consequence of the war, it
was decided to postpone its publication; but, at the request of the
publishers, I have now finished it and seen it through the press. At
a time when British troops are in occupation of Southern Mesopotamia,
the appearance of a work upon its earlier history may perhaps not be
considered altogether inopportune.
Thanks to recent excavation Babylon has ceased to be an abstraction,
and we are now able to reconstitute the main features of one of the
most famous cities of the ancient world. Unlike Ashur and Nineveh, the
great capitals of Assyria, Babylon survived with but little change
under the Achæmenian kings of Persia, and from the time of Herodotus
onward we possess accounts of her magnificence, which recent research
has in great part substantiated. It is true that we must modify the
description Herodotus has left us of her size, but on all other points
the accuracy of his information is confirmed. The Lion Frieze of the
Citadel and the enamelled beasts of the Ishtar Gate enable us to
understand something of the spell she cast. It is claimed that the
site has been identified of her most famous building, the Hanging
Gardens of the royal palace; and, if that should prove to be the case,
they can hardly be said to have justified their reputation. Far more
impressive is the Tower of Babel with its huge Peribolos, enclosing
what has been aptly described as the Vatican of Babylon.
The majority of the buildings uncovered date from the Neo-Babylonian
period, but they may be regarded as typical of Babylonian civilization
as a whole. For temples were rebuilt again and again on the old lines,
and religious conservatism retained the mud-brick walls and primitive
decoration of earlier periods. Even Nabopolassar's royal palace must
have borne a close resemblance to that of Hammurabi; and the street
network of the city appears to have descended without much change from
the time of the First Dynasty. The system which Hammurabi introduced
into the legislation of his country may perhaps have been reflected in
the earliest attempt at town-planning on a scientific basis. The most
striking fact about Babylon's history is the continuity of her culture
during the whole of the dynastic period. The principal modification
which took place was in the system of land-tenure, the primitive
custom of tribal or collective proprietorship giving place to private
ownership under the policy of purchase and annexation deliberately
pursued by the West-Semitic and Kassite conquerors. A parallel to
the earlier system and its long survival may be seen in the village
communities of India at the present day.
In contrast to that of Assyria, the history of Babylon is more
concerned with the development and spread of a civilization than with
the military achievements of a race. Her greatest period of power was
under her first line of kings; and in after ages her foreign policy was
dictated solely by her commercial needs. The letters from Boghaz Keui,
like those from Tell el-Amarna, suggest that, in keeping her trade
connexions open, she relied upon diplomacy in preference to force.
That she could fight at need is proved by her long struggle with the
northern kingdom, but in the later period her troops were never a match
for the trained legions of Assyria. It is possible that Nabopolassar
and his son owed their empire in great measure to the protecting arm of
Media; and Nebuchadnezzar's success at Carchemish does not prove that
the Babylonian character had suddenly changed. A recently recovered
letter throws light on the unsatisfactory state of at least one section
of the army during Nebuchadnezzar's later years, and incidentally it
suggests that Gobryas, who facilitated the Persian occupation, may be
identified with a Babylonian general of that name. With the fall of
Media, he may perhaps have despaired of any successful opposition on
his country's part.
Babylon's great wealth, due to her soil and semi-tropical climate,
enabled her to survive successive foreign dominations and to impose her
civilization on her conquerors. Her caravans carried that civilization
far afield, and one of the most fascinating problems of her history
is to trace the effect of such intercourse in the literary remains of
other nations. Much recent research has been devoted to this subject,
and the great value of its results has given rise in some quarters to
the view that the religious development of Western Asia, and in a minor
degree of Europe, was dominated by the influence of Babylon. The theory
which underlies such speculation assumes a reading of the country's
history which cannot be ignored. In the concluding chapter an estimate
has been attempted of the extent to which the assumption is in harmony
with historical research.
The delay in the publication of this volume has rendered it possible
to incorporate recent discoveries, some of which have not as yet
appeared in print. Professor A. T. Clay has been fortunate enough
to acquire for the Yale University Collection a complete list of
the early kings of Larsa, in addition to other documents with an
important bearing on the history of Babylon. He is at present preparing
the texts for publication, and has meanwhile very kindly sent me
transcripts of the pertinent material with full permission to make use
of them. The information afforded as to the overlapping of additional
dynasties with the First Dynasty of Babylon has thrown new light on
the circumstances which led to the rise of Babylon to power. But these
and other recent discoveries, in their general effect, do not involve
any drastic changes in the chronological scheme as a whole. They lead
rather to local rearrangements, which to a great extent counterbalance
one another. Under Babylon's later dynasties her history and that of
Assyria are so closely inter-related that it is difficult to isolate
the southern kingdom. An attempt has been made to indicate broadly
the chief phases of the conflict, and the manner in which Babylonian
interests alone were affected. In order to avoid needless repetition, a
fuller treatment of the period is postponed to the third volume of this
work. A combined account will then also be given of the literature and
civilization of both countries.
I take this opportunity of expressing my thanks to Monsieur F.
Thureau-Dangin, Conservateur-adjoint of the Museums of the Louvre, for
allowing me last spring to study unpublished historical material in his
charge. The information he placed at my disposal I found most useful
during subsequent work in the Ottoman Museum at Constantinople shortly
before the war. Reference has already been made to my indebtedness
to Professor Clay, who has furnished me from time to time with other
unpublished material, for which detailed acknowledgment is made in the
course of this work. With Professor C. F. Burney I have discussed many
of the problems connected with the influence of Babylon upon Hebrew
literature; and I am indebted to Professor A. C. Headlam for permission
to reprint portions of an article on that subject, which I contributed
in 1912 to the _Church Quarterly Review._
To Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge my thanks are due, as he suggested that I
should write these histories, and he has given me the benefit of his
advice. To him, as to Sir Frederic Kenyon and Mr. D. G. Hogarth, I
am indebted for permission to make use of illustrations, which have
appeared in official publications of the British Museum. My thanks
are also due to Monsieur Ernest Leroux of Paris for allowing me to
reproduce some of the plates from the "Mémoires de la Délégation en
Perse," published by him under the editorship of Monsieur J. de Morgan;
and to the Council and Secretary of the Society of Biblical Archæology
for the loan of a block employed to illustrate a paper I contributed to
their Proceedings. The greater number of the plates illustrating the
excavations are from photographs taken on the spot; and the plans and
drawings figured in the text are the work of Mr. E. J. Lambert and Mr.
C. O. Waterhouse, who have spared no pains to ensure their accuracy.
The designs upon the cover of this volume represent the two most
prominent figures in Babylonian tradition. In the panel on the face of
the cover the national hero Gilgamesh is portrayed, whose epic reflects
the Babylonian heroic ideal. The panel on the back of the binding
contains a figure of Marduk, the city-god of Babylon, grasping in his
right hand the flaming sword with which he severed the dragon of chaos.
L. W. KING.
CONTENTS
    CHAPTER I
    INTRODUCTORY: BABYLON'S PLACE IN THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY
    Babylon as a centre of civilization--Illustrations
    of foreign influence--Babylon's share in the origin
    of the culture she distributed--Causes which led to
    her rise as capital--Advantages of her geographical
    position--Transcontinental lines of traffic--The Euphrates
    route, the Royal Road, and the Gates of Zagros--Her
    supremacy based on the strategic and commercial qualities
    of her site--The political centre of gravity in Babylonia
    illustrated by the later capitals, Seleucia, Ctesiphon,
    and Baghdad--The Persian Gulf as barrier, and as channel
    of international commerce--Navigation on the Euphrates and
    the Tigris--Causes of Babylon's deposition--Her treatment
    by Cyrus, Alexander, and Seleucus--The Arab conquest of
    Mesopotamia instructive for comparison with the era of
    early city-states--Effect of slackening of international
    communications--Effect of restoration of commercial
    intercourse with the West--Three main periods of Babylon's
    foreign influence--Extent to which she moulded the cultural
    development of other races-Traces of contact in Hebrew
    religion and in Greek mythology--Recent speculation on the
    subject to be tested by the study of history
    CHAPTER II
    THE CITY OF BABYLON AND ITS REMAINS: A DISCUSSION OF THE
    RECENT EXCAVATIONS
    The site of Babylon in popular tradition--Observations of
    Benjamin of Tudela and John Eldred--Exaggerations of early
    travellers--The description of Herodotus--Modern survey and
    excavation--Characteristics of Babylonian architecture--The
    architect's ideal--Comparison of Babylonian and Assyrian
    architectural design--Difficulties of Babylonian
    excavation--The extent of Babylon and the classical
    tradition--Remains of the ancient city--The Walls of
    Babylon--The Outer City-wall--The Mound Bâbil--The Ḳaṣr--The
    Inner City-wall--Imgur-Bêl and Nimitti-Bêl--Quay-walls and
    fortifications--Nebuchadnezzar's river-fortification--Change
    in the course of the Euphrates--Palaces of Nabopolassar
    and Nebuchadnezzar--The official courts of the
    palace--Al-Bît-shar-Bâbili--The Throne-Room and its
    enamelled façade--The private palace and the women's
    apartments--The Hanging Gardens of Babylon--The Ishtar Gate
    and its Bulls and Dragons--Later defences of the Southern
    Citadel--The Lion Frieze--The Procession Street--Temples
    of Babylon--E-makh, the temple of Ninmakh--Altars in the
    Babylonian and Hebrew cults--The unidentified temple--The
    temple of Ishtar of Akkad--Religious mural decoration--The
    temple of Ninib--E-sagila and the Tower of Babylon--The
    Peribolos or Sacred Precincts--E-zida and the Temple-tower
    of Borsippa--The Euphrates bridge--Merkes and the street
    net-work of Babylon--Strata of different periods--Early
    Babylonian town-planning--Material influence of the
    West-Semitic Dynasty--Continuity of Babylonian culture
    CHAPTER III
    THE DYNASTIES OF BABYLON: THE CHRONOLOGICAL SCHEME IN THE
    LIGHT OF RECENT DISCOVERIES
    Chronology the skeleton of history--Principal defect
    in the Babylonian scheme--The Dynasties of Nîsin,
    Larsa and Babylon--Discovery of a List of the kings of
    Larsa--Introduction of fresh uncertainty--Relationship
    of the kings of Babylon and Nîsin--Absence of
    synchronisms--Evidence of date-formula?.--A fresh and
    sounder line of research--Double-dates supply the missing
    link for the chronology--The Nîsin era--Explanation of the
    double-dates--The problem of Rîm-Sin--Method of reconciling
    data--Another line of evidence--Archæological research and
    the Second Dynasty of the Kings' List--Date-formulæ of
    Hammurabi, Samsu-iluna and Iluma-ilum--Methods of fixing
    period of First Dynasty--Ammi-zaduga's omens from the planet
    Venus--Combinations of Venus, sun, and moon--Possibility of
    fixing period of observations--Alternative dates in their
    relation to historical results--The time of harvest in
    farming-out contracts of the period--Probable date for the
    First Dynasty--Re-examination of chronological notices in
    later texts--The Dynasties of Berossus and the beginning of
    his historical period--Effect of recent discoveries on the
    chronological scheme as a whole--Our new picture of the rise
    of Babylon
    CHAPTER IV
    THE WESTERN SEMITES AND THE FIRST DYNASTY OF BABYLON
    Original home of the Amurru, or Western Semites--Arabia
    one of the main breeding-grounds of the human race--The
    great Semitic migrations and their cause--Evidence
    of diminution of rainfall in Arabia--The life of the
    pastoral nomad conditioned by the desert--The change
    from pastoral to agricultural life--Successive stages of
    Canaanite civilization--The neolithic inhabitants and
    the Amorite migration--Canaanites of history and their
    culture--Eastern Syria and the middle Euphrates--Recent
    excavations at Carchemish and its neighbourhood--Early
    Babylonian cylinder-seals on the Sajûr--Trade of Carchemish
    with Northern Babylonia--West Semitic settlements on
    the Khâbûr--The kingdom of Khana--The Amorite invasion
    of Babylonia--The Dynasties of Nîsin and Larsa--Recent
    discoveries at Ashur--Proto-Mitannians--The Western
    Semites in Babylon and their conflict with Assyria--Early
    struggles and methods of expansion--The Elamite conquest
    of Larsa--The three-cornered contest of Nîsin, Elam and
    Babylon--The fall of Nîsin and the duel between Babylon and
    Elam--Hammurabi's defeat of Rîm-Sin and the annexation of
    Sumer by Babylon--Extent of Hammurabi's empire--Hammurabi
    the founder of Babylon's greatness--His work as law-giver
    and administrator
    CHAPTER V
    THE AGE OF HAMMURABI AND ITS INFLUENCE ON LATER PERIODS
    The energy of the Western Semite and his perpetuation of a
    dying culture--His age one of transition--Contemporaneous
    evidence on social and political conditions--The three
    grades in the social scale of Babylon--The nobles a
    racial aristocracy--Origin and rights of the middle
    class--Condition of slaves--Pastoral and agricultural
    life in early Babylonia--Regulations sanction
    long-established custom--The _corvée_ for public
    works--Canals and fishing-rights--Methods of irrigation
    and their modern equivalents--Survival of the Babylonian
    plough and grain-drill--Importance of the date-palm
    and encouragement of plantations--Methods of transport
    by water--The commercial activities of Babylon and the
    larger cities--Partnerships for foreign trade--Life in the
    towns--Family life in early Babylonia--The position of
    women--Privileges enjoyed by votaries--The administration
    of justice--Relation of the crown and the priestly
    hierarchy under the Western Semites--The royal regulation
    of the calendar and the naming of the year--System of
    administration--Changes in the religious sphere and
    revision of the pantheon--Literary activity--The complete
    semitization of the country unaccompanied by any break in
    culture--Babylon's later civilization moulded by Hammurabi's
    age
    CHAPTER VI
    THE CLOSE OF THE FIRST DYNASTY OF BABYLON AND THE KINGS FROM
    THE COUNTRY OF THE SEA
    Condition of the empire on Samsu-iluna's accession--Early
    Kassite raid the signal for revolt, assisted by Elamite
    invasion--Resources of Babylon strained in suppressing
    the rebellion--Rise of an independent kingdom in the
    Sea-Country on the littoral of the Persian Gulf--Capacity
    of the Sea-Country for defence and as a base for offensive
    operations--Sumerian elements in its population--Babylon's
    loss of territory and her struggle with the Sea-Country
    kings--Symptoms of decadence under the later West-Semitic
    kings of Babylon--The deification of royalty and increased
    luxury of ritual--Evidence of Babylon's growing wealth
    and artistic progress under foreign influence--Temporary
    restoration of Babylon's power under Ammi-ditana--Renewed
    activity of the Sea-Country followed by gradual decline of
